---
title: "How many more? Sample size determination in studies of morphological integration and evolvability"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2016-01-01-how-many
excerpt: 'The variational properties of living organisms are an important component of current evolutionary theory. As a consequence, researchers working on the field of multivariate evolution have increasingly used integration and evolvability statistics as a way of capturing the potentially complex patterns of trait association and their effects over evolutionary trajectories. Little attention has been paid, however, to the cascading effects that inaccurate estimates of trait covariance have on these widely used evolutionary statistics.
Here, we analyse the relationship between sampling effort and inaccuracy in evolvability and integration statistics calculated from 10‐trait matrices with varying patterns of covariation and magnitudes of integration. We then extrapolate our initial approach to different numbers of traits and different magnitudes of integration and estimate general equations relating the inaccuracy of the statistics of interest to sampling effort. We validate our equations using a data set of cranial traits and use them to make sample size recommendations.'
date: 2016-01-01
venue: 'Methods in Ecology and Evolution'
paperurl: 'https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/2041-210X.12674'
citation: 'Grabowski, M. G.* and A. Porto* 2016. How many more? Sample size determination in studies of morphological integration and evolvability. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, v.8(5), pp.592-603.'
---
The variational properties of living organisms are an important component of current evolutionary theory. As a consequence, researchers working on the field of multivariate evolution have increasingly used integration and evolvability statistics as a way of capturing the potentially complex patterns of trait association and their effects over evolutionary trajectories. Little attention has been paid, however, to the cascading effects that inaccurate estimates of trait covariance have on these widely used evolutionary statistics.
Here, we analyse the relationship between sampling effort and inaccuracy in evolvability and integration statistics calculated from 10‐trait matrices with varying patterns of covariation and magnitudes of integration. We then extrapolate our initial approach to different numbers of traits and different magnitudes of integration and estimate general equations relating the inaccuracy of the statistics of interest to sampling effort. We validate our equations using a data set of cranial traits and use them to make sample size recommendations.

[[pdf]](https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/2041-210X.12674)

Recommended citation:Grabowski, M. G.* and A. Porto* 2016. How many more? Sample size determination in studies of morphological integration and evolvability. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, v.8(5), pp.592-603.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5161288/
